We know a wallet can help us make transactions and it can manage many transactions,
how do we ensure that we can trust a transaction that is listed in our wallet?
This is done using a signature.
A digital signature establishes a proof of
ownership for each transaction on the blockchain.
Earlier, we discussed wallet types and management of private and public keys.
We discussed the process used to secure wallet address ownership,
the various ways to manage
private and public keys and how this relates to wallet security.
We also discussed how the wallet process establishes trust.
Wallets however are only a part of the equation.
We must also ensure that transactions are secure.
Why would somebody trusts a transaction on the blockchain?
The transaction starts broadcasting to the network
when a wallet first signs the transaction.
Like a pen and paper check,
Bitcoin requires a signature from
the sender before the transaction is submitted to the network.
In Bitcoin, this is done using a digital signature.
So, how does this proof of ownership help establish security on the blockchain?
Well, imagine if sending Bitcoin were easy as sending an email,
what's stopping a thief from sending your Bitcoin to other people?
That's what signatures are for.
They ensure that it's actually you who's sending Bitcoin
by signing the transaction with your own personal identity.
This signature is created using a Bitcoin wallet address.
The wallet address is similar to a bank account number.
It's a unique address that belongs to you.
This wallet address is linked to a private key.
So, instead of a signature on a paper check,
you'll use your private key to perform a transaction.
Once a transaction is signed,
it goes from the sender to the receiver as a transaction message.
In Bitcoin, the transaction message is broadcasted to the chain
as an unspent transaction output known as UTXO.
Only these unspent transaction outputs can be used as inputs to an accepted transaction.
Each of these unspent transaction output contains conditions
regarding the proof of ownership to transact with those funds.
These proofs of ownership are derived from your private key.
Let's break this down by starting with transaction inputs.
Transaction inputs are considered inbound
payments that contribute to funding your wallet.
Imagine, you have a wallet with a zero balance and want to send Bitcoin to your friend.
The first problem you'll encounter is a lack of funds.
You'll need to fund your wallet and perform a transfer of value using transaction inputs.
To get these funds,
you can obtain them from several sources at different times.
Each transaction that is transferred to
your wallet is considered a new transaction input.
Each transaction input has a condition.
The transaction input will need to be converted to
an output which contains the condition to prove ownership using your private key.
With your private key, you can sign your transaction with
your digital signature proving you own the address containing the transaction inputs.
A wallet must contain funds to be able to produce valid transaction outputs.
This allows you to transfer value on the blockchain to your friend.
Let's imagine that your wallet obtained
three transaction inputs with the following values 0.25,
0.45, 0.33 of a Bitcoin,
your wallet is now worth 1.03 Bitcoin.
All right. If you obtain three transaction inputs,
creating a total value of 1.03 Bitcoin,
how do we make sure to pay your friend,
pay the transaction fee and obtain 0.027 bitcoin change back?
Now, that's a great question and is the idea behind transaction outputs.
To create a transaction output,
you need to have the sum of the transaction inputs
which are equal to or greater than the value you are sending,
Next, we will include the miners fee into the outbound transaction.
Remember, that miners transaction fees motivates miners
on the network to include your transaction into the next block on the chain.
Basically, any amount greater than one bitcoin will go to the miners transaction fee.
Depending on the organization of your transaction inputs,
you might be transmitting more value than you prefer.
In the case of you sending one Bitcoin to your friend,
you would expect to get changed back.
Good news, we can do that.
Just like the way we created a transaction from you to your friend,
we could create a new transaction including
outputs for change to be returned back to you.
Here, you would create a transaction output,1.003 to your friend.
This output includes miners transaction fees of 0.003.
The remainder of your input transaction will now be configured as
a new output for change which will return 0.027 Bitcoin back to your wallet.
Now that we understand how a transaction works,
utilizing you UTXO, the next step is to
transmit this transaction be included in the blockchain mempool.
To recap, you learn the purpose of proving
address ownership by signing a transaction with your private key.
Finally, you learned how transaction inputs and outputs have conditions called proofs.
These proofs are valid unspent transaction outputs known
as UTXO to transfer value from one wallet address to another.
These are all extremely important concepts that allow
users to trust a transaction on the blockchain.